README.md, before:

# sol_cgt

`sol_cgt` is a command line tool for computing capital gains from Solana (SPL)
token trading with an emphasis on auditability and Australian tax reporting.
The project ingests transactions via the Helius Enhanced API, normalises them
into a canonical event model, performs lot based cost base tracking and emits
CSV/Parquet/XLSX reports as well as pretty console summaries.

## Quick start

If you're new to Python tooling, follow these steps exactly.

1. **Install prerequisites**

   - Install [Python 3.11](https://www.python.org/downloads/).

2. **Clone the repository**

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/<you>/sol-cgt.git
   cd sol-cgt
   ```

3. **Create a virtual environment and install dependencies**

   ```bash
   python -m venv .venv
   . .venv/bin/activate
   python -m pip install -U pip
   python -m pip install -r requirements.txt
   python -m pip install -e .
   ```

   On Windows PowerShell, activate with:

   ```powershell
   .\.venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1
   ```

4. **Provide your API keys (required for fetch, optional for pricing)**

   ```bash
   cp .env.example .env
   ```

   Open `.env` in a text editor and paste your [Helius](https://www.helius.dev/) API key (`HELIUS_API_KEY`, required for `fetch`). If you also add a [Birdeye](https://birdeye.so/) key (`BIRDEYE_API_KEY`) the tool can source token prices directly from Birdeye. Don't have a Birdeye key? No problem — the app uses free price and FX sources by default.

5. **(Optional) Create a config file**

   ```bash
   cp config.example.yaml config.yaml
   ```

   Edit `config.yaml` to list the wallet addresses you care about and tweak defaults such as the tax method or timezone. Anything you set on the command line overrides this file.

6. **Fetch raw transactions for your wallet(s)**

   ```bash
   solcgt fetch -w <YOUR_WALLET_ADDRESS>
   ```

   Replace `<YOUR_WALLET_ADDRESS>` with an actual Solana address. The tool pulls transactions via the Helius Enhanced API and caches them in `./cache/raw/` so you only need to refetch when new activity occurs.

7. **Generate the capital gains report**

   ```bash
   solcgt compute \
     -w <YOUR_WALLET_ADDRESS> \
     --fy "2024-2025" \
     --format both \
     --xlsx out.xlsx
   ```

   This runs the entire pipeline (normalisation → reconciliation → accounting → reporting). Reports are written to `./reports/<wallet_or_combined>/<financial_year>/` in CSV/Parquet format (use `--format csv|parquet|both`), and the XLSX is written to the path you pass via `--xlsx`. The console also prints rich tables summarising gains/losses and any items needing attention. You can also scope the output with `--fy-start`/`--fy-end` instead of `--fy`.

Need a reminder of the available options? Use:

```bash
solcgt --help
solcgt report --help
```

## Features

- Multi-wallet aggregation with self-transfer reconciliation.
- Deterministic lot matching using FIFO/LIFO/HIFO/Specific ID.
- Cached price and FX lookups to avoid repeated API calls (CoinGecko for SOL, Jupiter for tokens, optional Birdeye, FX via frankfurter.app with an RBA fallback).
- Structured CSV/Parquet/XLSX exports and console summaries via `rich`.

## CLI examples

```bash
solcgt compute \
  --wallet <ADDR1> \
  --wallet <ADDR2> \
  --fy "2024-2025" \
  --method FIFO \
  --xlsx out.xlsx \
  --outdir out/
```

Use `--dry-run` to normalize without accounting. `report` is a backward-compatible alias for `compute`.

Config flags:
- `external_lot_tracking`: attempt to match transfers returning from external wallets (default true).
- `fx_source`: `frankfurter` (default) or `rba` (Reserve Bank of Australia data).

## Migration notes

- Transfers between included wallets are now treated as non-taxable lot moves.
- Transfers to external wallets are treated as out-of-scope moves with warnings (no disposal).

## Development

Tests can be executed with:

```bash
python -m pip install -r requirements-dev.txt
pytest
```

The repository stores normalised transactions and API payloads in `./cache` to
make runs idempotent and auditable.

> **Disclaimer:** This tool assists with record keeping but is not tax advice.

Commit message:

Make reporting extras optional and drop heavy deps

README.md, after:

# sol_cgt

`sol_cgt` is a command line tool for computing capital gains from Solana (SPL)
token trading with an emphasis on auditability and Australian tax reporting.
The project ingests transactions via the Helius Enhanced API, normalises them
into a canonical event model, performs lot based cost base tracking and emits
CSV/XLSX reports with optional Parquet export and rich console summaries.

## Quick start

If you're new to Python tooling, follow these steps exactly.

1. **Install prerequisites**

   - Install [Python 3.11](https://www.python.org/downloads/).

2. **Clone the repository**

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/<you>/sol-cgt.git
   cd sol-cgt
   ```

3. **Create a virtual environment and install dependencies**

   ```bash
   python -m venv .venv
   . .venv/bin/activate
   python -m pip install -U pip
   python -m pip install -e .
   # Optional extras:
   # python -m pip install -e ".[parquet]"
   # python -m pip install -e ".[pretty]"
   ```

   On Windows PowerShell, activate with:

   ```powershell
   .\.venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1
   ```

4. **Provide your API keys (required for fetch, optional for pricing)**

   ```bash
   cp .env.example .env
   ```

   Open `.env` in a text editor and paste your [Helius](https://www.helius.dev/) API key (`HELIUS_API_KEY`, required for `fetch`). If you also add a [Birdeye](https://birdeye.so/) key (`BIRDEYE_API_KEY`) the tool can source token prices directly from Birdeye. Don't have a Birdeye key? No problem — the app uses free price and FX sources by default.

5. **(Optional) Create a config file**

   ```bash
   cp config.example.yaml config.yaml
   ```

   Edit `config.yaml` to list the wallet addresses you care about and tweak defaults such as the tax method or timezone. Anything you set on the command line overrides this file.

6. **Fetch raw transactions for your wallet(s)**

   ```bash
   solcgt fetch -w <YOUR_WALLET_ADDRESS>
   ```

   Replace `<YOUR_WALLET_ADDRESS>` with an actual Solana address. The tool pulls transactions via the Helius Enhanced API and caches them in `./cache/raw/` so you only need to refetch when new activity occurs.

7. **Generate the capital gains report**

   ```bash
   solcgt compute \
     -w <YOUR_WALLET_ADDRESS> \
     --fy "2024-2025" \
     --format both \
     --xlsx out.xlsx
   ```

   This runs the entire pipeline (normalisation → reconciliation → accounting → reporting). Reports are written to `./reports/<wallet_or_combined>/<financial_year>/` in CSV format by default (use `--format parquet|both` with the optional `parquet` extra), and the XLSX is written to the path you pass via `--xlsx`. The console prints rich tables if the optional `pretty` extra is installed, otherwise it falls back to plain text. You can also scope the output with `--fy-start`/`--fy-end` instead of `--fy`.

Need a reminder of the available options? Use:

```bash
solcgt --help
solcgt report --help
```

## Features

- Multi-wallet aggregation with self-transfer reconciliation.
- Deterministic lot matching using FIFO/LIFO/HIFO/Specific ID.
- Cached price and FX lookups to avoid repeated API calls (CoinGecko for SOL, Jupiter for tokens, optional Birdeye, FX via frankfurter.app with an RBA fallback).
- Structured CSV/XLSX exports by default, with Parquet and rich console summaries available via extras.

## CLI examples

```bash
solcgt compute \
  --wallet <ADDR1> \
  --wallet <ADDR2> \
  --fy "2024-2025" \
  --method FIFO \
  --xlsx out.xlsx \
  --outdir out/
```

Use `--dry-run` to normalize without accounting. `report` is a backward-compatible alias for `compute`.

Config flags:
- `external_lot_tracking`: attempt to match transfers returning from external wallets (default true).
- `fx_source`: `frankfurter` (default) or `rba` (Reserve Bank of Australia data).

## Migration notes

- Transfers between included wallets are now treated as non-taxable lot moves.
- Transfers to external wallets are treated as out-of-scope moves with warnings (no disposal).

## Development

Tests can be executed with:

```bash
python -m pip install -e ".[dev]"
pytest
```

The repository stores normalised transactions and API payloads in `./cache` to
make runs idempotent and auditable.

> **Disclaimer:** This tool assists with record keeping but is not tax advice.
